Hi, everybody.
Thank you.
Okay, this is session 101,
FireWire Overview.
And that's me.
What we're going to talk about in this
session is FireWire's big picture.
We're going to look at what's happened
over the past year in the industry,
in Mac OS X.
We're going to take a
look at where we are now,
and then we'll discuss some of
the directions that we're going in
the future that we'd like you as
developers to help us to get there.
With the particular
focus in this session on,
for you as a developer,
what opportunities do you have
for developing FireWire products?
We're going to address six
specific sections today.
First is to review changes to the
big picture since WWDC last year.
We'll be looking at the
industry and products.
Second section is to talk about what
new services we've added to Mac OS X.
We've been working really hard
and exclusively on Mac OS X to
provide services to facilitate
developing for FireWire.
Then we'll talk about
future work in Mac OS X,
things that we're working on right now
that we're planning to add that we hope
will enable you to take FireWire further,
make new applications, new devices.
As we do every year,
we'll have a section on do's
and don'ts for FireWire.
This is not a marketing session.
It's things that we've learned by working
with developers over the past year,
what worked, what didn't,
things that might help you
to get faster to the product
that you're trying to make.
Then we'll have a special
presentation on IEEE 1394b,
the future of FireWire,
including a very interesting demo.
And we will conclude by
reviewing developer resources,
things that Apple does for you
specifically related to FireWire
that you need to be aware of to
help you develop your products.
And, of course,
we'll then have questions.
So the first section is what's
happened to FireWire since we
got together last year at WWDC.
Apple today has FireWire ports in
100% of our Macintosh products.
This was actually true
last year at WWDC as well,
but every single product
has been changed since then,
so it's worth repeating.
It's also very important because,
as developers,
this really simplifies your position
to your customers regarding FireWire.
It's in all of our products.
You don't have to list a
bunch of products that you're
compatible with as long as you're
shipping from modern systems.
All of our desktop products,
that's the G4 tower and
the various kinds of iMac,
all have two FireWire ports.
And all of our portable products,
the PowerBook G4 and the iBook,
both have a single FireWire port.
Aside from that difference,
they're pretty much all the same.
Every single one provides cable
power so that you can do things
like charge an iPod or run a hub.
And they all support
the six-pin connector,
which is the standard connector
called out in the 1394 spec.
And they all support
all of the cable speeds,
100, 200, and 400 megabits.
So you can talk to your iPod,
which is a 400 megabit device,
your DV camera,
which is a 100 megabit device,
or if you can find the
odd 200 megabit device,
we can talk to that, too.
So the point here is that from
your customer's point of view,
it's all the same.
All the products have FireWire.
They all have the same capabilities.
You shouldn't need to design
in a product-specific way.
You can just design for
Macintosh in general.
Thank you.
Since we were here last year,
Apple shipped the iPod.
This is a big step for us.
It's Apple's first ever
FireWire peripheral device.
And the iPod is really a showcase
of all the things that you can
do with a product using FireWire.
The iPod runs on cable power.
The FireWire port provides
electrical power on the cable in
addition to the lines for data.
This power is sufficient
to not just run the iPod,
but to recharge the
batteries at the same time.
The iPod also demonstrates really
good integration of plug and play.
You plug the iPod into your Macintosh,
iTunes will launch,
iTunes will automatically
synchronize all of your music with
whatever you've lately downloaded
or new playlists you've created.
It's completely automatic.
It could not be easier.
Of course, you can turn that off if you
want to manage things manually,
but it really demonstrates the
capability to make things easy to use.
speed.
There's lots and lots of
MP3 players out there.
None have FireWire except the iPod.
The iPod really demonstrates
the speed of FireWire.
The iPod can copy data ten times faster
than any USB MP3 player on the market.
Now,
FireWire is 30 times faster than USB 1.1,
but the very small hard drive
in the iPod isn't the world's
highest performance hard drive,
so you actually get about a
ten times speed improvement.
And finally, size.
This picture may not suggest it,
but you know the iPod is
really a tiny product,
and having the small six-pin FireWire
port on there helps make that possible.
If you remember when we had
SCSI connectors on some of our products,
the SCSI connector is
actually wider than the iPod,
so that just would not
have worked on this device.
Also since last year, we have iPhoto.
You've probably seen demonstrations of
iPhoto hooked up to USB still cameras.
Well, it turns out iPhoto
is not limited to USB.
It is a general-purpose
camera application.
And in fact, in Mac OS X today,
iPhoto supports the Nikon D1 series
of cameras with FireWire interfaces.
We're also adding support for
additional cameras already on
the market that have FireWire
support for still image transfer.
Let's talk briefly about that.
Why would someone have put
FireWire on that Nikon camera,
for example?
You've all heard of USB 2.0.
It's kind of reaching the market.
A USB 2.0 camera could be about
as fast as a FireWire camera.
There's no question about that.
But there's this big
installed base of USB.
It's all USB 1.1.
Tens of millions of systems out there.
They could work with USB 2 devices,
but they'll be slow.
Think about this as a developer.
If you were selling this camera
and it had a USB 2 interface,
your customers, your first customers,
your most important,
would buy this camera, take it home,
and most of them would plug
it into a USB 1.1 system.
It would work correctly,
but they would be incredibly
disappointed with the performance.
They'd be calling your tech support,
they'd be returning the
cameras to the stores,
you'd probably get bad press.
Ask yourself as a developer,
do you really want to put
yourself and your customers
through something like that?
You could choose to design
with FireWire ports instead.
Virtually every computer out
there with a FireWire interface
supports the fast S400 speed.
So your customers can have a good
experience right out of the box,
get very high performance
by using FireWire.
Additionally,
there's much more power available
on FireWire than on USB.
Even USB 2.0 does not add any more power.
So the still cameras that are out there
now are able to run and charge the
batteries from FireWire cable power.
That's something that really wasn't
practical or would be much slower on USB.
So there really are reasons to consider
using FireWire for this kind of device,
even though USB 2.0 might enable
you to reach about the same speed.
Also, since last year,
Apple made a very important acquisition.
We have acquired a company called
Zionte that was exclusively staffed
with experts in 1394 technology.
I'd particularly like to welcome
Michael Thiener back to Apple Computer,
and Prashant Khan here,
and many other talented people.
We are delighted to have them.
It's going to be a big boost to
Apple in our ability to incorporate
FireWire in our products,
and we want to make it a big
boost for developers as well by
increasing the number of services
that we can provide and the
breadth that we can cover on 1394.
We're going to have Mike up
here later talking about 1394B.
Finally, since last year,
FireWire won an Emmy.
That was kind of unexpected.
This Emmy was presented
simply to FireWire,
not to any particular product,
just to the technology.
Apple's product, Final Cut Pro,
is used extensively in the
broadcast television industry.
It has really revolutionized
some of the work they do,
and they chose to recognize this
by presenting an Emmy to FireWire.
Okay, now we'll go into a little
more depth about what we've
added in Mac OS X for FireWire.
probably the number one question
that we get on our mailing
list is answered by this,
the SCSI-TASK user client.
This was announced last year but has
only become available since then and
now is ready for developers to use.
There's a lot of devices out there,
like printers, scanners,
certain kinds of still camera,
certain kinds of storage or
mass storage related device,
that have a SCSI architecture
model in their design.
They may have an ATA interface or
they may have a FireWire interface,
but at heart they use
this architectural model.
Previously, developers had to use
the raw SPP2 services,
perhaps even in the kernel,
in order to talk to this kind of device.
And it was possible to do that,
but you ended up doing a lot of 1394
and SPP2-specific work rather than
focusing on what your device did.
So the SCSI task user client for most
kinds of these devices will make it much,
much easier to access your device
and do so from application space,
which is vastly preferable
to working in the kernel.
Also since last year,
we've added an AVC user client.
AVC is the command set that's used
to control consumer electronic
audio/video types of devices,
such as the camera and
television shown here.
The protocol that transports
AVC is a function control protocol,
and the command sets for AVC are
defined by the 1394 Trade Association.
There are command sets for televisions,
tuners, satellite receivers, camcorders,
any kind of audio or video
equipment that you can imagine.
So there's a wide variety
of command sets available,
and the devices that use
them are starting to appear.
You can put the two together with
the AVC user client and create
innovative software applications
for controlling these devices.
Something else we did since last
year is that we've made the source
code available to the DV driver.
We know for years folks working with
Mac OS 9 have sent us questions about
how does this thing really work,
how can I hook into it,
how can I communicate with DV cameras.
For years it was secret.
We finally fixed that.
We've put it in Darwin.
It's open source.
You can get at it and
see exactly how it works.
The project is IO FireWire DV.
Now, the way it hooks in is changing
slightly because of the ABC user client,
but it should be an excellent
reference for people who are
working with isochronous devices,
which is real-time.
Anyone who's trying to write
drivers to send or receive real-time
video or who'd like to understand
how the DV driver hooks in to
higher layers such as QuickTime,
iMovie, and so on.
That was the old number one question
on our mailing list before our
SCSI task user client came along.
Other new things that we've
added in the past year,
we've greatly expanded the
HeaderDoc in FireWire for Mac OS X.
Almost 100 methods, classes,
and so on are now documented.
We have an all-new document
for writing user clients
called "Working with FireWire
Device Interfaces." It's available
on the web on developer.apple.com.
You can get that today.
It has a wealth of information
about how to access your devices
from applications rather than
trying to write kernel drivers.
We continue to publish software
development kits for Mac OS X.
We have distributed 12 of those to date,
including five new ones since last year.
Additionally,
Apple provides CPU developer
technical notes on the web that show
architectural details of the FireWire
implementation in our various products.
For example, for the G4, for the iMac,
for the iBook, you can see what the
controller is hooked up to,
what the internal architecture
of the system is like.
It also has information about the pinout,
the amount of power provided, and so on.
Those are all available in
public on the developer website.
Okay, moving on.
Future FireWire work in Mac OS X.
We have a very strong
set of services today.
You can write applications,
you can write drivers, printers,
scanners, DV, hard drives,
other mass storage,
but there's still more to do.
Starting in Jaguar,
we are going to provide a standard
driver for IIDC-type cameras.
These are commonly known as DCAM cameras.
I've pictured two commercial ones here,
the iBot and the ADS camera
that you may recognize.
In Jaguar,
QuickTime will provide a standard
driver for these cameras that's
capable of very high frame rate,
high resolution input.
This is a big jump from the
sample code that we've provided
previously in the SDK that only
ran at very small image sizes.
In fact, we have a demonstration of this.
We have the demonstration video.
Thank you.
This is one of those IIDC-type cameras.
This one's made by Sony.
It's a somewhat professional model,
a little more rugged.
And you can see,
if you were here last year,
this demo would have been a little
postage stamp up in the corner.
You can see here, well,
some of you are sitting in the dark,
that we have very high frame rate,
high quality, very fast input.
So we hope developers will make use
of this to create new applications
for this kind of camera or even
new products like this camera.
Okay, let's go back to the slides.
I mentioned already that we had
added a user client for AVC.
We're doing further work in
Jaguar to extend its capabilities.
Specifically,
we're adding a service layer
called asynchronous connections.
This is a protocol,
one of those that I mentioned that you
can get from the 1394 Trade Association,
for moving data serially
between two devices through
the ABC and FCP protocols.
It's not the world's fastest protocol.
If you're looking to
create an all-new device,
it might not be your best first choice.
But if your device already
speaks ABC and you need to add
still image transfer to it,
for example,
it might be a reasonable choice.
And in fact,
there are DV cameras on the market today
from Canon that implement this protocol,
and they use it to move still
images out of the camera.
Additionally,
we are adding a subunit enumeration
capability to the AVC user client.
The AVC spec defines subunits within
a device that represent its functions.
For example,
there's a camera storage subunit,
using the example I just gave.
There's a DV camera subunit.
There's a tape transport subunit.
There can be a TV tuner subunit.
We now, in Jaguar,
we discover these for you by querying
each AVC device when it's connected,
and we publish appropriate
information in the I/O registry.
So you can now make sure
that your software finds,
loads, and talks with devices that
have the particular functions
that you actually need,
such as the still camera--sorry,
the camera storage subunit
that's in that Canon camera.
Another feature that we've
added in the AVC User Client
is support for AVC targets.
A target means that the Macintosh
would be the recipient of
commands from another AVC device.
In the past, we've always taken a
controller's point of view.
We can control the devices out there,
but now they can talk to us.
So if you'd like to write a truly
peer-to-peer application using
one of the AVC command sets,
you can now do this.
Finally, and perhaps the biggest change,
the DV driver itself has
been moved to user space,
together with the changes
to the AVC user client.
This is pretty big work
because the DV driver is a
real-time resource that's used,
for example,
by iMovie and Final Cut Pro when
capturing video or when exporting
video back to the camera.
That video has to be transferred
in a frame-accurate way.
We can't lose any data.
So, initially,
the service was put in the kernel
because we knew it would work there.
Since AVC services became
available in the user client,
we have moved the DV driver
itself out into user space,
and it continues to deliver
frame-accurate video
for import and export.
So if you were not convinced
previously that user space was
a reasonable place to work,
this should help change
your mind about that.
The user space APIs allow for data
movement without data copying,
but your driver can all be in user
space where it's much easier to debug,
has much greater ability to coexist
with other things on the system.
Another major area that we are
working on is the support of
the TCP/IP protocol on 1394.
Now, this is a feature for after Jaguar,
but we are working on it now.
The Internet Protocol, IP,
is a great protocol because it's been
deployed in lots and lots of different
devices and services and so on.
But you have to keep in mind that
IP was designed to connect the world.
It does that well.
It can connect devices
all over the world.
They can interoperate even though
they have different operating systems.
It was not designed for a small
local area bus like FireWire.
IP can run on FireWire,
but it doesn't take advantage of all
of the characteristics that FireWire
has due to being a smaller bus.
So, consider using IP if you want to
interoperate with a wider area device,
application or service.
Consider IP for leveraging
existing software,
existing services.
Or consider it for managing a device,
doing something that doesn't require
the highest possible bandwidth.
Don't consider it for, say,
a video camera like you just saw
or a high performance disk drive.
IP may, however,
be more convenient because
of its peer-to-peer nature.
If you think about target disk mode,
that's the ability in our products
today to make the Macintosh
emulate a FireWire hard drive.
It works great.
It's very fast,
but it requires rebooting the Macintosh.
That's slightly inconvenient.
Using IP 1394,
it may be possible to connect two Macs
together with the same FireWire cable,
use the IP protocol to do file
sharing or FTP or whatever your
favorite transfer protocol is,
to move files in the same way as
you would do with target disk mode,
but more conveniently.
Now, we don't have a schedule to
announce for IP 1394 because
this is where you come in.
We need developer input about how
you're going to adopt this in order
to help us set the right schedule.
We would like to produce this software
when you're ready to use it and
do our qualification when you have
prototypes or initial applications
ready so that we can make sure we've
given you what you actually need.
If we went and did it next month and we
overlooked something that you needed,
we'd have to go do it again,
re-qualify it,
ship it to customers a second time.
That would be silly.
So, don't stand up right now,
but we would like to hear from you what
you want to do with IP 1394 and when.
You can come to our feedback forum on
Friday or you can send us information
on our mailing list or in private
using the contact information
that's at the end of these slides.
So, we're ready to do it.
We think it's a good thing,
but we need your help.
Another area that we're
working on is SBP3.
That's Serial Bus Protocol.
It's the transport that's used
by FireWire hard disk drives,
as well as other items like the printers,
scanners, and cameras I talked about that
use the SCSI-TASC user client.
SBP2 is the one that's shipping today.
SBP3 is backwards-compatible enhancements
to add new services and new performance.
There's three main
categories of things in SPP3.
Fast start is a speed-up that
allows us to make a device
start doing something faster.
Basically, fast start takes all of the
information that the device will need,
bundles it into a single packet,
and sends it to the device all at once.
This is faster than
the way it works today,
where the device has to collect
various bits of information from
the host before it can get started.
We have done performance tests that show
improvements of 30% or more for certain
kinds of I/O when using fast start.
Some of the major vendors of silicon for
1394 on SPP have shown interest in this.
One worked with us to give us
prototypes for that measurement.
We expect a big boost in performance
for devices when this is deployed.
The standard for SPP3
is still being written,
but the fast start portion has
been declared stable by ANSI,
which is the parent organization.
This means that it's not
anticipated to change.
It would take a large vote of
a large number of people to
make any changes at this point.
If you'd like to start
working with fast start,
please do so now.
You can be pretty sure
that it won't change,
and we will have software support for it
by the time you're ready with products.
The next area in SPP3 is 1394.1.
This is a fairly complex area.
It's bus bridges.
The ability to connect two 1394
buses together and have them
continue to operate even though
they are not the same bus.
SBP, as defined,
doesn't have all of the structure needed
to work in a .1 bridge environment,
so SBP3 is adding that.
And it has a beneficial side effect.
Bus resets do not cross a 1394.1 bridge,
so life has to go on
without knowing about them.
Consequently,
SBP3 is defining ways for bridge-aware
devices to continue operation
across a bus reset without having
to stop like they do today and get
reconnected and restart their orbs.
This means that even if you
don't have a 1394.1 bridged
environment with multiple buses,
your device may get a significant
performance and robustness improvement
just from using the .1 awareness in SBP3.
So, that's the first step.
We're looking forward to that as another
big improvement to that kind of device.
Finally, SBP3 is working to define
isochronous services.
This is by far the most
complex part of the work.
Today, if you run, for example, iMovie,
and you connect a FireWire hard
drive and a FireWire DV camera,
and you capture video from
the camera to the hard drive,
the video actually moves
into the Macintosh first,
and then cross FireWire a
second time onto the hard drive.
That works, but it's inefficient.
It uses the bus twice for every packet.
A hard drive built with SBP3,
capable of isochronous transfer,
may be able to directly exchange
video with the camcorder,
yielding higher performance,
greatly reduced CPU and
memory demands on the host,
and greatly increased
efficiency of the 1394 bus.
This work is the most
complicated part of SBP3,
and it's still being hashed out,
but it has great potential.
Okay,
the next part of the presentation is
FireWire Do's and Don'ts for 2002.
These are things that we've
learned working with developers
making our own products,
things that are helpful,
and things you want to avoid.
So we'll start with the Do's.
Innovate.
The FireWire standard is really rich.
It provides a lot of performance,
capability, service, flexibility.
There are some great products
out there that you can make.
Look at the iPod, for example.
Developers should find
new ways to use FireWire.
We're doing pretty well on
hard drives and DV cameras.
There's a lot more clever
things that you can do.
Use FireWire to make products
faster than they were before.
Or use it to make products work together.
iMovie was a good example of that.
A FireWire hard drive,
a FireWire TV camera,
together they can do more than
either one can do by themselves.
Because FireWire is a peer-to-peer bus,
and because FireWire is suitable for
so many different kinds of devices,
there's a great deal of potential
out there to find two devices,
figure out a new way for
them to work together,
and make a new product around that.
But while you're out there innovating,
try to stay focused.
We don't want you to innovate on ways of
deviating from the official standards.
As I said, it's a peer-to-peer bus.
This means everybody on that bus
has to play according to the rules
or things break down pretty quick.
So if you find that you want
to do something that the
spec just doesn't cover,
participate in the standards process.
It's an open community
of very talented people.
What you need can be added.
Or even more likely,
what you need is probably
already there and you just can't
tell it from reading the spec.
So please, before you think about
trying to do something that
doesn't comply with the spec,
talk with us.
Come to 1394 events.
You can probably do it in the spec.
And everyone will be a
lot happier if you do.
This has been a very important
topic for the last year:
test your products with bus resets.
The concept of a bus reset
is widely misunderstood.
On FireWire,
a bus reset is an ordinary event that
indicates a perfectly healthy bus.
It's like a packet collision in Ethernet.
It happens routinely,
causes no harm as long as everyone
complies with the standard.
It's not an error.
It's not an excuse to tell
the user something went wrong.
A bus reset could happen because
a new device was connected.
FireWire is hot-pluggable,
so the user is allowed
to do that at any time.
A device could be removed
for the same reason.
Even if a device remains
connected to the bus,
it might be turned on or turned off,
and either of those
could cause a bus reset.
The device might even change state.
For example, some of the video cameras,
if you change it from
camera mode to VCR mode,
it's never losing power,
but its operational state has changed,
and a bus reset may result in order
to alert devices on the bus that
its capabilities have changed.
So the point is, your customers may have
bus resets on their bus,
even though they're using the
bus in completely legal ways.
So your devices and your software
need to react accordingly.
If you follow the standards,
it's not a problem.
For example,
SBP2 defines exactly how to continue
your operation across a bus reset.
But you do need to pay attention to that.
It's not automatic.
And equally important,
test your devices and your
software with bus resets.
We are going to be providing a tool
in one of the upcoming SDKs that will
generate bus resets automatically,
so this should make it much easier
to run this kind of testing.
Very important, if you do these things,
you'll have a much more reliable,
robust device.
You'll get better reviews,
fewer phone calls, everyone wins.
Next, operate on cable power.
This is one of FireWire's
strongest areas.
There's no other bus technology out
there in common computers that provides
anywhere near this kind of power.
I talked before about the iPod.
It shows how to really
take advantage of that.
Apple products, especially our desktops,
provide lots of power on FireWire.
So take advantage of it.
If your device is going to
be connected by FireWire,
maybe you don't need a
separate power adapter.
On the iPod,
FireWire is the only power input.
There is no DC power jack.
You have to use FireWire to charge it.
Keep in mind that USB does provide power,
but it's limited to, at most, 2.5 watts,
and in many cases, just 0.5 watts.
For example,
the USB ports on our keyboards
provide only 0.5 watts.
That's not a good place to connect
some device that needs a lot of power.
The FireWire ports on our products
provide anywhere from 6 to 15 watts.
Generally,
the battery-powered portable ones
are at the low end of that range.
The desktops, the iMacs,
are at the high end of that range.
attend 1394 Trade Association PlugFests.
This is a group we haven't
stressed quite as much before,
but they made a big change this year.
They opened up their PlugFests
to non-member companies.
The Trade Association is a group
of approximately 150 companies,
all promoting 1394 in their
products and in the industry.
They hold plug fests about four times
a year where you can test a device
against a broad collection of devices
from other participating companies.
But in the past,
it was limited to member companies,
and membership costs
$4,000 to $8,000 a year.
So for an independent developer,
that might have been prohibitive.
These are now open to everybody.
You can sign up as a guest.
You can learn a lot at
one of these events.
You can meet engineers, software,
hardware, and testing engineers from
other 1394 developers.
You can test against prototype devices,
or you can test against devices that
you might not otherwise encounter.
The Trade Association is
deploying standard test suites,
for example, a base test that will test
whether you have a PHY,
a configuration ROM,
all the basic 1394 aspects.
Then they will deploy more sophisticated
suites for things like AFI or SBP.
Since this is now open,
it's a really good resource.
Apple goes to all of these.
We learn a lot every time we go.
We'd definitely like to
encourage you to attend these,
too.
Of course,
we learn a lot about other people's bugs,
not our own.
As a developer,
one of the most valuable things you can
do is attend the 1394 Trade Association's
Developers Conference.
This is coming up in June.
It's being hosted at
Microsoft up in Redmond.
We did this last year
together with Microsoft.
We had a really good turnout.
We had excellent technical presentations.
The value of this is that it's a
completely different focus than
what you'd get here at WWDC.
This is mostly a
hardware-oriented conference.
There's presentations on
protocols and software as well,
but you can get access to
information about board design,
silicon selection, things that we just
don't offer here at WWDC.
You also get a very different
perspective because it's extensively
participated in by PC vendors and people
from the general Wintel community.
FireWire, as you know,
is an open industry standard.
It's completely cross-platform
between Mac and PC.
So you can design devices
for Mac and sell them to
customers who buy PCs as well.
Perhaps the most interesting session at
DEVCON was the Ask the Experts panel.
We had a free open Q&A with both
the experts and the developers.
Both Apple and
Microsoft answered questions,
sometimes agreeing, sometimes not.
It was very interesting.
We learned a lot about what
people are trying to do with
FireWire from their questions.
So I would recommend anyone interested
in making FireWire devices seriously
consider attending this event.
Okay, now let's move into the don'ts.
This one's not actually new this year.
We knew this all along.
Don't use this four-pin connector.
This is what you find on DV cameras.
It was not in the 1394 standard.
It was added under some protest
subsequent to the standard.
It provides no power,
so right off the bat,
it's pretty useless.
It's awkward.
If you've tried plugging
one of these things in,
it's so small, it's so hard to line up,
it's really not easy to use.
And finally, it's fragile.
This is a pretty subtle point, but...
This connector puts the parts that break,
the spring-loaded parts
that have to move,
they're in the socket,
which means if you jam the connector in
the wrong way and you break something,
you've broken the socket.
Your cable will be fine.
Your camera may have
to go in for repairs.
The six-pin connector that we use in
all of our products is the opposite.
The spring-loaded parts are in the cable.
The socket on our product has all of
the fixed parts that don't break off.
So by and large, if you plug something
in wrong and break it,
it's going to break off.
You'll have damaged the cable.
You can throw the cable away
and keep using your Mac or your
iPod with some other cable.
So there's really a lot of problems
with the four-pin connector.
You don't want to use it.
Even if you don't use cable
power in your product,
use the six-pin connector.
Power is always optional.
You can use the six-pin connector
even if your device ignores the power.
If you're a hardware vendor,
please don't design your products
just using silicon vendor data sheets.
1394 is a fairly rich, it's a very rich,
fairly complex standard.
The vendor's data sheet for
their PHY silicon or their
LINQ silicon is not going to tell
you everything that you need to
know to make a successful product.
Read the standard.
Pay attention to the standard.
Make sure you understand
what you're doing.
please don't ask us to work around
somebody else's mistakes you guys are
great about this compared with other
bus technologies that i won't name
fire by products are really very good
compliance with the spec is very high
we want to keep it that way okay it's
important it's a peer-to-peer bus
all these devices are doing different
things they have to play by the rules
or it's not going to work if something
is broken maybe a software workaround
would be possible for that device but
it may have impact on everyone else on
the bus so occasionally uh... somebody
does ask us to fix something that they
broke or they made a bad choice we have
very simple answer for that which is no
There's great products out there.
You've all been doing a really good job.
Let's keep it that way.
And to encourage you to keep it that way,
we are not fixing mistakes like that.
Finally, don't think of USB 2.0 as
being equal to FireWire.
There's definitely some similarities.
USB 2.0's high speed delivers
about the same performance as
today's S400 FireWire ports.
But that's where the similarities end.
Operating system support for
USB 2.0 is extremely limited.
Power on USB 2.0 is extremely
limited compared with FireWire.
The installed base of USB can be viewed
as a liability rather than an asset,
as I described before
talking about the cameras.
That installed base is all slow
host controllers that's going to
provide low performance even if you
plug in a high-speed capable device.
So as developers,
you may want to consider avoiding that.
You may want to consider whether
FireWire is really a better choice for
your product and for your customers.
Okay, now I'd like to welcome
Michael Teener back to
Apple Computer after about five years.
He's going to talk to us about 1394b.
Michael?
Thanks, Eric.
It's good to be back.
You people laugh at the jokes.
When in heck they don't
laugh at the jokes.
uh...
[Transcript missing]
So what we're going to do
is do a little demo here.
And over here, what the gang is doing is
they're going to show you that
little demo we did earlier.
That was running over
glass optical fiber.
So what we're going to do is turn
it on and now we're going to start
showing you what this really means.
What we've got here is
a glass optical fiber.
Remember glass optical fiber when running
full speed can go 3.2 gigabit a second,
but we don't have a 3.2
gigabit a second here,
so this is only running at S400.
But as the guys unwind it here, it,
remember it's 100 meters.
It can go 100 meters.
The back of this room is about 20 meters.
So they could probably go out to
the lunch room and we can do a,
we're going to do a
David Letterman thing here for you.
And that's one hop.
Remember, one hop,
you can put a hub out there and keep
on going as far as you want to go.
It's pretty extensive.
That could be, as I said,
it could be glass optical fiber,
it could be a category five
unshielded twisted pair.
Same stuff that we use on ethernet.
As a matter of fact, we use two pairs,
ethernet,
100 megabit ethernet uses two pairs,
so you could run them on the same
It looks like we're going
to come back right now.
But we don't have time
here to go all the way.
So if we get back to
the presentation here,
I think we're done with David Letterman.
So, what do we see there?
Well, we start out with a Mac, as normal,
and we went from the Mac.
This Mac, by the way, is a, you know,
off-the-shelf, standard,
last-year model iBook.
Nothing fancy.
Thank you, Shana.
We have a hub.
This is a little hub device
that can carry plastic.
This one's a glass optical fiber
with with two A ports on it.
goes out on glass fiber
out to another hub,
which is hidden in Eric's hand there.
Notice the clever packaging we use.
And out to the camera
with the standard one.
But we had this reel of cable in there,
showing a little bit more distance.
Well, it is glass optical fiber,
so we couldn't carry the power.
They wouldn't allow us to launch enough
optical power down there to do it.
So we have a battery hidden in there.
So are you going to hold up the battery?
I'm going to break the demo
here by holding up the battery.
Notice the clever wiring
system that the guys did.
Now, what did we do?
What has 1394b got to
it that's kind of cool,
besides the fact that it's fast?
One of the key things to get
it to go this fast is we used
something called BOSS arbitration.
And it's much more efficient
than 1394a and the Legacy.
Well, a little sidebar here.
I'm going to go over here.
This sidebar.
Okay.
Sidebar.
BOSS.
That stands for
Bus Owner Supervisor Selector.
And indeed, as you suspected,
we came up with that acronym
after we invented the word BOSS.
boss, I'll go way over here.
Okay, I'm in the blue part of the screen.
BOSS was an acronym picked by
the engineers at Intel that
were working with us on this,
and it's very radical by Intel standards
because it is a four-letter acronym.
Very important.
This is a radical bunch
of Intel engineers.
Okay, back into the center.
The key thing about what
this BOSS arbitration did,
which I had a minor part in inventing,
mostly it was invented
by people from Intel,
is we came up with something that
pipelines the arbitration,
which means that instead
of sending a packet,
arbitrating for the bus,
finding out who owns it,
send another packet,
is we figured out a way to send a packet.
While that packet's being sent,
we're arbitrating for the
bus for the next packet.
So as soon as we finish sending a packet,
we know who's the next guy
to send and they can send,
which means there's very
few gaps between packets.
The result is we get about 97%, a
bit better than 97%, of the bandwidth
at S800 is available for data,
using big packets, of course,
4k byte writes.
That's very efficient.
1394a is not bad,
but it's closer to 90% efficient.
Well, 1394b also has a new connector.
Sorry about that, guys.
I know you love connectors.
Today's existing 1394 cables cannot
run at 800 megabits a second.
They were designed to run
400 megabits a second.
Furthermore,
the existing connector has a great
deal of difficulty running faster
than about 400 megabits a second.
So we figured if we're going
to make the speed change,
we're really going to go for it.
So we designed new media
and a new connector.
This connector and media
is capable of running,
and in fact has been tested,
at 3.2 gigabit a second.
So, one more cable,
but at least you're going to get
some more lifetime out of it.
So,
in order to support this new connector,
we have three new cables.
We have one that uses the
9- to the 4-pin connector.
I don't recommend this
for all the right reasons,
but you've got to connect to
those old camcorders somehow.
The 9- to 6-pin connector,
which carries power,
the 9-pin connector does have power,
same kind, and a 9-to-9,
which is what you need to do to go to the
full high-speed capability of the system.
Well, I said there's three new cables,
but actually a typical customer,
consumer only needs one new cable,
and I'll show you what I mean.
This is the way things work right now.
You've got a computer, a disk, a scanner,
a camera, for example.
And what you do is use a 6-to-6 cable
going between the computer and the disk,
and a 6-to-6 between
the disk and the camera,
or a scanner, and, well, darn,
there's that 6-to-4 connector
to go out to your camcorder.
Well, in the hypothetical future,
the computer could be replaced
by one that supports 1394b.
It has a 9-pin connector in it,
but everything else stays the same.
So you can use the existing cables.
The one place for your
new one is to go here.
There's a 9-6 pin connector.
Of course, if the customer goes out and
buys new stuff everywhere,
it can have a new cable coming with it,
and that could be a 9-9 if it
was a hypothetical 800 megabit
or 1.6 gigabit disk drive.
So, where can 1394b be used in products?
It's key to think of 1394b as a package.
The electronics and the
connector are tied together.
You can't separate them.
The new connector,
the nine-pin connector,
means that there's a new PHY, the new,
what's called, beta-capable PHY in it.
A new PHY, one of those new things,
has to be used with a new connector.
Don't mix the two.
It won't work.
There's all kinds of scenarios I can
show that will lead to everything from
inconvenience to smoking computers,
so don't do that.
1394b is an official standard as of now.
It passed its final ballot.
The technical work was all
finished on January of this year.
Final draft revision is 1.33.
It was approved by the
IEEE for actual publication,
which means it's done.
It's actually called IEEE 1394b-2002.
And they're right in the middle of
actually getting it so you'll be
able to order it on their website.
What kind of product opportunities
are there in the short term?
Well, certainly you can do PCI cards
for all those older Macs.
It can be 800 or, you know,
basically my suggestion
is get the fastest one you
can when you ship the card.
Another one which is really
interesting are these hubs.
Those hubs, for either unshielded twisted
pair or one of the optical fibers,
are useful even for legacy products,
which means that if you could
buy the parts right now,
you could instantly have a
network of Macs in the peripherals
going out 100 meters or more.
So those hubs are useful for
legacy products right now.
They're really useful for
something in the future,
but they're really needed right now.
Cables, the 9-4, 9-6, and 9-9,
and the long-haul cables.
The good news is the
long-haul cables are standard.
That glass optical fiber
connector in there,
it's the same one used for gigabit
ethernet when it's running optical fiber.
That plastic optical fiber,
well it's new because nobody
does plastic optical fiber,
but the UTP5 is a standard RJ45.
So not much new that
you have to do there.
Storage,
it turns out ATA drives already are
fast enough that a 400 megabit a
second connection is not good enough.
You can saturate on one drive.
Now, that's a peak rate,
but really it's one drive.
So you really want to go to
800 megabits on your hard disk
things as soon as possible.
In fact, my buddies in the business say,
in about a year and a half
they're going to need that 1.6,
so please get the
silicon ready forthwith.
But you need 800 as soon as possible.
Another big product,
and indeed where people are actually
shipping things that aren't quite 1394b,
but they needed to ship them
anyway because they needed it,
was professional networks.
Some of my friends at a company
called Amion Video Networks have
a 800 megabit glass optical fiber
network that's used for HD studios,
HD production equipment.
Wimbledon, for instance,
was produced using that
equipment this year.
Yamaha is demonstrating various pro-level
things that would be highly enabled if
they could get B-level products and hubs,
because that way they
could build big studios,
they could build it for
performance equipment,
digital projection, things like that.
Finally, innovate.
There are a lot of things
that I couldn't think of,
that anybody at Apple probably
couldn't think of,
that you can do.
But remember, innovate but don't deviate.
We don't believe in deviates
around here too much.
So, I think that's it.
I'll be around a little bit for people
that want to talk to me about this.
But if there's anything
more on the B stuff,
I'll be glad to answer that at that time.
Okay, thank you, Michael.
Not just Mike,
but we've got a bunch of really talented,
smart people from Zyante.
It's going to be a
really big boost for us.
On the demo that we showed,
I'd like to thank Nunex for providing
the fiber optic transceiver and cable.
They are here at the show,
and you can visit them
in the vendor area.
So please go take a look
at what they've got.
Okay,
we're getting close to time for Q&A,
which is always my favorite part.
But let's quickly recap the developer
resources that we make available to you.
Apple has a big developer program.
Go to developer.apple.com if you're
not already familiar with it.
There's a lot there.
First of all, Thursday this week we
are having a plug fest.
That's where we get all the
FireWire devices together,
we plug them in,
we see that they work just
fine and don't have any bugs,
and then we just go eat and drink.
That's Thursday.
It is during the Apple Bash, which,
if the weather holds up,
I believe is supposed to
be held back at Apple,
just like we did last year.
Last year this worked out great.
If it is at Apple,
it's in a room called Garage,
which is nicer than it sounds.
It's above the cafeteria.
It's a big conference room.
Bring your FireWire devices.
The whole FireWire engineering
team will be there.
You can ask us questions.
You can meet other FireWire developers.
The 1394 Trade Association also
has PlugFests.
I mentioned this before.
These are much bigger events.
Our PlugFest this week
will be a few hours.
At the 1394 TA PlugFests, well,
they don't serve beer and food,
but it runs for three days,
and you can test with a
whole bunch of other devices.
You do one-on-one testing
and a sort of melee,
which is like the one
we'll be doing on Thursday,
where everybody plugs in at once.
There's one coming up soon
in August in Bellevue,
Washington.
There's one scheduled
for October in Taiwan.
Another one next year somewhere
here on the West Coast.
And then in April every year,
there's one in Tokyo.
The Tokyo and the Taiwan ones
are especially big,
representing a huge number
of developers over there.
Apple attends all of these,
so we welcome you to do that, too.
Just a few days ago,
the 1394 Trade Association agreed
to accept an offer from Apple to
use our firewire logo with
their compliance program.
This is the compliance logo
that Apple has provided.
I'm sure you'll recognize it.
We've just added 1394 compliant.
And the Trade Association is rolling
out a big compliance effort to award
compliance logos to products that
pass testing at these plug fests.
So this is a way to show your potential
customers that your product has actually
been tested and is likely to work.
This can't be obtained from Apple.
This can only be obtained from
the 1394 Trade Association.
If the Plugfest schedule that I showed
you is not convenient for you,
you're ready sooner,
or you'd like to test with
a little more privacy,
you may want to contact a company
called Quantum Parametrics.
It's the vendor that is being
used by the Trade Association to
develop the tests in this program.
And my expectation is that
Quantum Parametrics will also
be able to run those tests on
your product and issue the logo.
Kitchens.
A FireWire kitchen is three
or four days where we meet
one-on-one with key developers
We give tutorials on the
latest developments in FireWire
in much more detail than
we're able to do here at WWDC.
We have hands-on
development and debugging.
Every developer gets a Mac with
our latest stuff pre-installed
right in front of them.
And we sometimes have
related presentations.
For example,
at the last kitchen in Tokyo,
we gave a presentation on
how to use FireWire for
Pima-type still-image cameras.
We hold these in Cupertino and in Tokyo.
We do it two or three times a year.
Typically,
we get 20 or so of the most interested
developers together with our engineers.
It's a really intense,
really good way to get
up to speed quickly.
At our last kitchen in Tokyo,
we had several developers who
left with working drivers,
not shipping, but working drivers for
devices that they had brought.
I mentioned before that we
provide software development kits.
We've done 12 so far for
Mac OS X as of last month.
These kits are posted for free
public download on the web.
Each one has our very latest drivers,
including things that we may
be planning to ship in a future
version of Mac OS X so that you can
start testing with them right away.
Each one includes all of the
source code for convenient access.
Each one includes sample code for, like,
we have an SPP2 demo application.
We have sample code for that camera.
Each one includes all of the
documentation that we have.
And there's usually some
tools included as well,
things just that you'll need
when developing for FireWire.
They're available for free
public download on the web,
so if you haven't already,
please pick one up and give it a try.
Okay, here's the roadmap to other
sessions here at WWDC this week.
I talked about
SCSI-TASK User-Client earlier.
If you want to learn more
about how it actually works,
it will be covered in Session 111,
which is on Wednesday in
the Civic Auditorium.
That's the big theater across the
street from the Convention Center.
It's actually a really interesting place,
so you should check it out.
If you don't go for this one,
come see us on Thursday.
That's where we'll be.
And that's what's next,
115 Firewire In-Depth.
We will talk in much more detail
about the new services in Mac OS X,
things like IP 1394,
software impact of 1394B.
We'll cover the entire architecture
for Firewire in Mac OS X,
and we'll have a how-to
session for I've got a device,
what do I do to write software for it?
We have our Plugfest.
That's on Thursday starting at 7.
It is scheduled to be at the Apple campus
at the Bash in that garage room.
And then Friday, 9 a.m.
Don't stay too late at the Plugfest.
We have our FireWire
and USB feedback forum.
It's a smaller session.
There's no presentation.
It's one hour where you can
come and give us feedback.
What are we doing right?
What are we doing wrong?
What are we doing that
you just don't understand?
What should we put in our SDK?
What should we put in our APIs?
It's your chance to influence the work
that we do for the next year so that we
can come back next year and talk about
all the great stuff that we've added.
You can also ask general questions,
but the primary focus for
that is to tell us what to do.
A couple more roadmap sessions.
In Steve's keynote,
he talked about rendezvous and
zero-configuration networking.
We're adding TCPIP for FireWire,
so those are two things that
will definitely play together.
That session, which was not shown on the
agenda until very recently,
is session 811,
and that's on Thursday at 2,
just before our session.
That's in room J,
down at the other end of
the convention center.
Finally, there's a session 008,
the APIs for disk recording.
If you've been using SPP2,
maybe moving to SCSI Task User Client,
because your device is a CD-ROM burner,
DVD-R, or something,
you may find that we have APIs that
you can just do exactly what you
want to do without any of the messy,
low-lying details.
That's in hall 2 on Thursday, also at 2,
so pick networking or disk burning.
Here's contact information.
You'll meet him in a second.
Guillermo Ortiz is with
Apple's Developer Relations.
He handles technology
management for FireWire.
If you've been sending
questions to FireWire@apple.com,
Guillermo is the one
who's been receiving them.
We have a public mailing
list for FireWire developers.
You don't need to be a member
of Apple's developer program.
It has a pretty wide audience,
including a lot of people just lurking,
like Mike until recently.
You can reach a wide audience of
Apple people and other developers.
It's a great place to ask questions.
It's even better when developers
answer questions for each other,
which happens more and more.
We love that.
You can subscribe by
visiting the URL shown there.
There's also a public mailing
list for mass storage development,
and about half the questions that we
get on the FireWire list relate in some
way or another to mass storage devices,
so sometimes we point people
over to this other list.
The subscription mechanism
is a little different,
but it's also public,
and you can subscribe as shown here.
For further information about FireWire,
here's the URL where you can download
the latest FireWire SDK from ECOS 10.
This page actually has pointers off
to several things that you might need,
one of which is the SDKs.
The new document I described earlier,
working with FireWire device interfaces,
is available on the web
at developer.apple.com,
as shown there.
And you may want to visit
the 1394 Trade Association to
learn more about the PlugFests,
the Developers Conference,
other events that they do,
or to pick up some of
those AVC standards.
There's the URL.